---
title: Responsibility at work
layout: page
visible: 0
---
Much has been happening recently at work, and it has become apparent to me
that writing a diary entry about it will be hugely usefull to me.  There
must be dozens of wonderfull insights about engineering and software and business
which can be gleaned from what's happened at work in the past few months, but no
isolated incident provides enough context to make any of them.  Therefore, the only
way to glean these insights is to describe all that's happened during the past few months
and reflect on it.  Here we go:

About responsibility:
  Responsibility is usefull when it's for things that haven't happened yet.
  If something has already happened, what's the use of knowing who was responsible?
  Do you want to punish him? Reward him? That won't fix the past.  (okay... it might
  have a use, but for now I'm just going to concentrate on the uses of responsibility
  for future events).

  Responsibility for future events is usefull in the following scenario:
    Person X notices a problem P. X can either
      a) fix P
      b) assume that someone else will fix P
    Responsibility allows X to pick the right choice.
  I have encountered a great many situations at work where I don't know what case I'm in.
  Let's list these situations:
    .) Turnstile needs an SRE.
       John asked me to do some SRE-like things for Turnstile.
       I told Diego, who said that I should find an SRE to do them.
       Liz said the SREs were busy, but she could teach me what I needed to know.
       I told Dave about the situation and he did his usual thing, where he just
         starts talking about what it will be like when I'm carying a pager.
         This is what Dave does when you tell him about a dilemma, he picks
         the solution in which you're doing the most work, and then just starts
         discussing what that case will be like without discussing whether or not
         you should
    .) At the offsite I was asked to come up with ideas for what features Ocean should implement.
       Firstly, high ranking people gave a presentation.  It in they:
          .) Outlined Ocean's past successes. (internationalization, some other features)
          .) Outilned a broad strategic and abstract set of goals for future.
       After the presentation, we had a brainstorm that was organized as follows:
        There were many tables, each with an assigned topic (e.g. social, engineering velocity...)
        We broke up into groups, each group took at turn at each table.
          While at the table, we came up with a list of concrete things we could do
          to improve that topic, essentially a list of features (e.g. shelves compiled based
          on your friends interests, sharable margin notes...).
          Someone wrote down the ideas on a sheet of paper.
          We later voted on ideas, and aggregated them into a single list of ideas.
       I didn't have much to say.
       My thoughts on the offsite are confused, complex, and very similar to the rest of my thoughts on
       decision making.
       What could the goal of the offsite have been?
       Answer X: "The goal of the offsite was to determine what Ocean should do in the future."
       X is the obvious answer.  Let's assume that X is in fact the answer.
       Then I do not believe the offsite was well formatted.

       Let's imagine for a moment that I have all the authority and responsibility.
       (i.e. I can make the members of Ocean do whatever I want, and there are no problems
        that I should treat as outside my scope.  For every problem, I should be able to find
        a person on Ocean to fix it, or I should determine that it should not yet be fixed.)
       Now, how would I go about figuring out what to do?
       I would try to generate clear descriptions of what needs people have,
       especially those related to books and printed material.
       I would try to generate descriptions of how those needs are being met, which ones
       aren't being met, which ones could be met better, which ones could be met more easily e.t.c.
       After that, I would develop a description of how they should be met ideally.
       After that, I would perhaps come up with a more reasonable way they might be met.
       After that, I would devise a plan for getting them met.
       When you can meet people's needs, there's a way to make them pay you;
       I'd figure that part out last, or as I went along.

       How (in real life, at the actualy offsite) did I help contribute to figuring out
       what Ocean should do?
       I had opportunity to discuss only small scale ideas.
       When you're sitting at a table marked "social" and your being told to generate
       concrete ideas of a "social" character, which improve Ocean and books and information,
       all the ideas you think of treat much of the world as being fixed.
       You only have a few seconds to propose an idea, so you don't have any time
       to articulate your guiding principles, or redefine your terms.
       I'm packed full of ideas that involve creating hybrid documents that share
       some of the properties of books and some of the properties of web pages.
       But I can't describe such an idea in a few seconds, I would need to
       articulate the similarities between books and web pages, examine a few
       examples of things that truly blur the line, describe why they are different,
       and argue for the benefits of erasing the distinction between them.
       I would want to propose a large number of concrete ideas for how to blur the line.
       People who argeed that there should be less of a distinction might then like
       to expand on my arguments, argue against them, endorse my concrete examples
       of things we should do e.t.c.  People could come up with reasons for keeping books
       and web pages separate and bring up downsides of my examples.

       I didn't find the meetings productive because I didn't have any ideas that I could
       articulate in just a few seconds.

       We didn't ask
        A) "How should the world work, and to what extent can we make it work that way?"
       We asked
        B) "What can we do with what we have?"
       The problem with B is that it does not encourage you to do new things, and it only
       partially encourages you to do good things.  Mostly, it encourages you to do things
       that are like the things you already do.
       There is nothing wrong with doing things that you already do, provided that the
       things you do are good.  If we had a convinicing explanation for why the things we
       do are good, then I would be more comfortable comming up with FINISHMEMAYBE??!

       The problem was that we did not focus on needs, we focused on solutions.
       As such, we had no opportunity to claim "We're doing this all wrong."
       We had no opportunity to claim "We should radically shift what we're all about."
       We had no opportunity to propose a radically different approach.
       And we had no indication that it was not appropriate to make those claims.

       I felt like people in my position were being given the responsibility for
       determining what the future should be like.
       I don't like having that responsibility when I have such limited ability to express myself.

       It's like I'm being told: "We need you to make the world work the right way.
       What are some features we can add to our existing products that make the world work
       the right way?"
       Well, if you want to make the world work the right way, don't suppose that
       addendums to your existing products can do so.

       The problem with the brainstorm is it assumes that addendums to existing
       products can solve the world's problems.

       They're saying, "Solve the world's problems by adding features to our existing products.
       As if adding features to existing products is up to the task of solving the world's problems."

       I don't see the point of the brainstorm.  What is the lager goal?  Why is my 20 second
       description of a social feature we could add to our reader going to make the world
       a better place?  If I knew, then I'd be happy to contribute.

