---
title: What do I do?
layout: page
---
What do I do?

I think I have answer for this question, at least at the moment.
I've been working at google for about a month and a half by now.
There is a bit of constancy to what I spend my time doing.  There
is enough constancy that I feel like I can give a partial answer to the
question of "what do I do?".  Of course, a lot is still new, and this
partial answer should be thought of as a partial answer, and subject to
change itself.

Here is a description of some of the aforementioned constancy:

I spend a lot of time finding out how things work.
I do science and research and investigation.
I do science because when I want to find out how some
software works, I'll write in it and look at my code's
behavior to find out how the software that it uses works.
I do research and investigation because I'm reading all this documentation,
and I'm asking all these people how their stuff works, and I'm tracking down
people who might know the answers to my questions.
I don't get educated.

Below, by investigation, I mean science and research and investigation.
In this document, I will contrast investigation with education.  I'm
using both these terms in very specific senses, so let's describe them more
fully.

Education and Investigation are two ways of learning things.

Here is how a person X learns some material M through education:
    X is referred to as a student, and there is some agent Y which we
    will call the teacher.  Y knows M well.  Y develops a plan for
    teaching M to any student.  Y has to think carefully about how to
    best present M so that it is easy to absorb.
Here is how a person X learns some material M through investigation:
    X basically does whatever he can to gain information about M.
    X conjectures many guesses as to how M works.  X hunts down people
    and documents that will tell him bits and pieces about M.  Through
    asking questions and reading documents and running experiments, X
    is able to put together a really good guess as to how M works, and
    by running more experiments and discussing M with more people, X becomes
    more confident that his guess is correct.

When Y educates X about M, Y defines an order on the material M.  Y figures
out what should be digested first and what next and so on so that everything
about M makes sense.  When X investigates M, X really does not get information
about M in order.  Almost everything X learns about M at first can't be fit into
X's current guess as to how M works because it doesn't make sense.  Typically,
X will understand some of the more details aspects of M before understanding the basics.

If X has learnt M, then when X tries to explain M, the nature of his explanation often
reveals whether he investigated M or was educated about M.

If X was educated about M, then the explanation will resemble his education;
X will give details about M in a nice order so that they are easy to digest
and each one makes perfect sense given the previous ones.  There will be a
lot of care to the explanation.

If X investigated M, then the explanation will resemble a mixed collection of facts.
If X is presenting the facts without being prompted, then he will give them in some
arbitrary order.  If someone is asking X questions about M, then (remember, we have assumed
that X learnt M) X will be able to answer every question, but his answers might not make
sense to the person asking them.  They will reference things that the asker does not understand.

{Learning M from someone who learnt M by investigating M} is a form of investigating M.
You wind up having to work really hard just to find any question you can ask whose answer
will be clear to you.

I have some examples in mind of me learning something from a person who must have learnt
it through investigation:
    0) Being taught compilers by John Reppy
    1) Learning about Gaia IDs from Jason Wilson
    2) Learning about Analytics from the folks on the second floor during their guru meeting

All these examples fit the description given above.

Actually, I have the impression that some people always learn things through investigation.
Every time I ask the people from those examples a question about something, I feel like I'm
conducting an investigation.


