---
title: Whether software people have any clue what they're doing
layout: page
---
I've decided that I need to start writing much more and much faster.
Also, lots of things that I keep in my head deserve to be written down.
Writing them will:

- give me practice in expressing things
- keep a usefull record
- remind me what is important to me
- crystalize??!!? (I have an idea what I mean by this, but
  I'll admit the meaning is somewhat amorphous)

I just spoke with my grandparents about the followng, so let's
start with:
    On the Organizational structure of a software company:

Do people working in the software industry have any idea what they are
doing?  They act like they do.  It's hard to beleive that loads of people
have all figured stuff out the wrong way.  Lots of them are smart.  They
care deeply about how they should be going about writing software.  Is
it possible that the industry has come up with the wrong practices?  That
it trains its engineers the wrong way?  That it makes people waste loads of
time?
Of course my answer to all these questions is a resounding YES.  Here's how:
I always think that I know better, for examples:

- People in the software industry use HTML, but HTML is AWFULL.

- Take a gander at the Turnidge Device (flows and subflows and fork-join
        and state machines)
        I can state many reasons why that approach is awful.

- Languages are inadequate, and it is obvious that we should stop
    using the ones that are presently popular and switch to ones that
    allow you to do a better job of expressing yourself.

- Caching is reimplemented many times.

- Documentation is never good.

- Code is not proven correct.

- Specifications don't really exist BUT THEY COULD.

The above statements are all things that I'm not comfortable saying,
but as of right now, my best guess is that they are correct.

I've felt the same thing with regards to education.  I'm always able
to come up with better ways of organizing the process of educating.  These
ways are far better than the ones presently in practice, but education doesn't change
to behave the way that I think it should, it just keeps doing things the wrong way.

As to the management and training of software engineers, I have been quite hesitant to
put forth an opinion, because I always figure that other people know much better than I
do.  I'm now considering changing my mind.  I should not be hesitant to put forth an opinion,
because no one else's opinion is any good.  Management and training of software
engineers has failed and here's some of the evidence:
- People who work on code, while admitting that they don't understand it.
    You say, "how does this work?" "why does it work this way?" and they say,
    "well, I've worked on it for a long time and I don't really know, but I can
    tell you how to implement the changes you will probably have to make"
    Also, the codelabs explain how software works by example, people explain how
    software works by example.  Doesn't anybody care about understanding things?
    This approach is awful, and when I say so, people don't disagree with me.
    They tend to respond by not saying much.

- Competing products:
  - ocean v.s. newsstand v.s. propeller v.s. catalogs
- No one talks about the philosophy and the larger picture.
  - Shouldn't the larger picture be made clear to me right away?
    Is the larger picture part of the culture? Not really, you're treated like to don't
    need to know the larger picture.  I'll bet a lot of people don't themselves
    know the larger picture.  Here are the things that I want to know about the
    larger picture:
    - Doesn't anyone realize the inelegance in distinguishing between
      different forms (books, magazines, blogs, papers, web sites) of content?
      It's all just content.  And though it may not be in our interest to treat
      it as such externally now (people who produce that content have very structured
      systems for doing so that involve solidifying the notion that their "books" are
      different from "magazines"), it should at least be made clear to employees
      what we should ultimately think of as content, and that the situation we
      are in now should be treated as a gruding compromise.

    - I'm sure I could think of others if you put me in the right circumstances.

  - There is no one talking to me about the way something is designed or about how I should
    write code.  The standards and established techniques that I hoped I might encounter
    turn out to be non-existant.
    The standards and techniques in producing software don't exist.
    The above sentence stand in stark contrast to what Lars told me.  What with "these
    guys have been doing the note card thing for a long time, and they know exactly how
    it works, and they're really good at it, and it would be great if I had enough practice
    with it that I could do the note card thing just as well."  Maybe Google (or at least the
    part of Google that I'm in) isn't like that.  Perhaps I'll get no pointers and no instruction
    at all, just challenges and resources.  I'll have to figure out how to use them myself.
    If there are any outstanding successfull principles for me to learn, then this is terrible,
    because I won't have any help in learning them.  Learning something complicated and subtle
    from a smart person who understands it well and is good at explaining it IS ALWAYS preferable
    to having to figure it out on your own, because you might not figure it out quite right the first
    time, or even notice its importance or whatever, it's just hard to do.  However, if it really is
    the case that no one around me has much of a grasp on the proper way to do things, then they
    do the right thing in providing no guideance; if I have nothing to learn from them, they are smart
    not to try to teach me.  Note, however, that by providing no guidance for this reason, they
    admit that they aren't very good at what they do.
    [Remember Korei, you actually believe that they are no good at what they do; you actually
     think that you have developed a far superior language, and a far superior approach to
     developing software.  So don't be surprised at yourself when you call "respectable" people
     idiots.  You already think they are idiots.]
    [Remember also, that figuring out how your job works for yourself is wonderfull.  You get
     to set up meetings with whomever you like


[You really need to figure out when the nature of your job is going to change]

